[THEME MUSIC]
>> This is Book Tours
and I'm Corinne Edwards.
I'd like you to meet one of the
most important new messengers
in publishing today.
Important because the
authors on this show
are dedicated to helping
your personal growth,
make you happier, healthier,
to be the best you can be.
We are delighted to welcome
George Kinder, author
of "The Seven Stages
of Money Maturity."
They say money, money, money
makes the world go around,
but can we embrace
a spiritual life
and still want to make
lots of that dirty stuff?
George Kinder says yes.
George is an internationally
known financial planner,
and wait, a Buddhist teacher.
George, I have heard
people say, "I'd
love to be spiritual but
I have to make a living."
What do you think of it?
>> Well, I think those are--
that's probably the
most important split
that we feel in America
today inside of ourselves.
I think about Thoreau
talking about us all living
lives of quiet desperation,
and I think that's part of it.
It's feeling that our spiritual
life is over here someplace,
and our money life is over here.
And it's really the reason
that I wrote the book
because it strikes me that if
we feel that our money life is
complex and difficult and dark,
and our spiritual life is just
fine, there's a problem there.
Because money has to do
with how we are articulating
our soul in the world, how
we are bringing our soul
into the world.
So I think it's very important
that we bring these two
worlds together and have
a healthy relationship
around money.
>> You are a very important
financial planner and I know
that you address your peers.
1,000 financial
advisors at a time.
>> Yes.
>> What did they say when you
say that it has to do with
spirituality?
Do you talk about that to them?
>> Yes, I do.
I do.
>> What do you say to them?
>> Well, I say the same thing
that I just was saying here,
basically, that as
a financial advisor,
you have a relationship with
someone sitting in your room.
And very often, what happens is
that they're sharing something
with you that they don't
share with their priest
or with their counselor, they
don't share with other people.
So there's almost an issue
of taboo around money.
And you recognize as
a financial advisor
that there's something
intimate going on in the room.
What do you do with it?
If you move back and you
just go to stocks and bonds,
the person that
you're with is not
going to feel connected with.
They aren't going to feel that
the central purpose of money
in their life is
being addressed.
And that central
purpose has to do
with what does
freedom mean to you,
and how can you accomplish
it in the world.
That's both a spiritual question
and a financial question.
>> What does
freedom mean to you?
>> And yet people are so
inhibited about money,
they say that people will talk
to you about their sex life
but they will never tell you
how much money they make.
>> Yes, that's right.
I have a number of
psychologist friends
who say it's absolutely
the last thing.
They'll talk about
terrible child abuse,
they'll talk about their
own personal relationship
to violence, to
horrible situations,
and they'll never
mentioned money.
>> Or a woman will never
tell you how much she weighs.
>> Yes, it's the same thing.
>> That's the other thing.
>> That's right, yeah.
>> Never about money and
never how much she weighs.
>> The shame about that, the
problem with that really is
that it means that
money is kind of hiding.
We're hiding our
lives around money.
And as a consequence,
when we're not
finding a way to
deal with it to make
our lives whole and complete.
So always, the
spirit's over on one
side and money's over
on the other side.
>> There's a shame--
>> Yes.
>> --about money?
>> Why?
>> Money, you know, there have
been all these surveys about
money and sex, showing that
the two most frequently thought
of subjects.
But you know what,
we think about more,
we think more about money
than we think about sex
but we don't talk about it.
And so a lot of
people feel a sense
of failure, a sense
of low self-esteem.
We read in the
Wall Street Journal
or in the daily paper
about how markets are
making fortunes for everybody.
But most of us don't experience
that inside of ourselves
or we experience how we've lost
money or we failed in business,
or we experience the
pain of a divorce
and the financial
consequences of that.
These are such
circumstances that if we
don't talk about them, and
if we don't have someone
that we can trust in relation to
the financial aspects of them,
we feel very low.
We feel a lack of
self-esteem and shame
about our relationship to money.
>> In recent times, the
stock market has gone crazy.
>> Yeah.
>> And people I talk to seem
to have so much shame that they
didn't get in on it.
>> Yeah.
>> And then they have
terrible shame if they sold--
>> Yes, yeah.
>> --before it really
went up very high.
>> Yes.
>> And then they have a lot of
shame especially if they sold
and they lost money
because they panicked.
>> That's right.
>> How do we get
over this shame?
>> It's interesting, we
use money to measure.
I mean, it's a measuring
concept how much money we have
or how much we lose.
And so we're constantly
measuring ourselves
against money.
And I think that the
important thing and what
I'm trying to teach
in the book is
how to come to
terms with and feel
comfortable with difficult
emotions around money.
That's really the secret,
is to learn comfortable
not with the
circumstances but to be
comfortable with feelings,
to feel at ease with anxiety,
to feel at ease with shame.
It's a practice, it's
a spiritual practice
and a psychological
practice of basically
of letting our thoughts
go, letting the stories go
that seemed to trap
us, and learning
to really feel at
ease in our bodies
around difficult feelings.
>> What is money maturity?
>> Money maturity
involves three things.
One of them is the
sense of ease or comfort
in our feelings around
money so that those
are no longer a problem.
The second piece of money
maturity is that we have--
we know that money is
about our aspirations
and about our freedom, and so
we connect our relationship
with money to our deepest
places inside of ourselves,
what's most profound for
us to recognize and realize
in our lives.
And then the third thing is to
create a financial plan that
gets you from A to Z,
basically, that takes you
from where you are to that
image of freedom or happiness.
>> You talk about freedom
and you talk about happiness
but then this book is
not just a holy book.
This book is a very, very
basic and practical guide.
>> Yes.
>> One of the startling
things that you say is,
in your chapter on knowledge,
is to write down how much money
you need to live.
Nobody does that.
>> No, no, no.
There are so many--
we have so many emotional
responses to money
that it's very
difficult for us to take
on the practical
realities of it.
And we need to know how
much we need to live.
We need to know how much
we need to have in order
to live the life
we want to live,
in order to accomplish
what we need to accomplish.
So we need all these practical
things that we have to address.
>> What does it do for us to
know how much money it costs us
to live?
Most of us are scared to
death to write it down.
>> Yeah.
Well, for those people
who are overspending,
it confronts them with the
fact that they're never
going to find their
image of freedom
because they're
constantly overspending.
So I think it's very important
to face money directly
as it's important to face
any difficult life situation.
>> I know you started in the
book telling your story and you
said that you had, even though
you were a mathematics genius
it sounds like when you were a
kid and you knew that you had
this ease with the figures--
that you were very
loathe to make money.
>> Yes, I was.
I actually, in spite of being
very strong in mathematics
and with money, I ended up
majoring in English Literature.
And I went out after college
and spent a couple of years
doing spiritual practices.
So I felt it inside of
myself, this terrible split
between money and my
true self in some way.
And I felt that I didn't
want to go out and have
to earn a living, but it
felt counterfeit in some way
to what I really wanted
to do with my life.
So it's a painful
period in my life.
And it took me many years of
working as a tax accountant,
as a financial advisor to
come to terms with that,
to figure that, in fact, these
two paths of spiritual practice
and of the financial
reality of life
are really one
and the same path.
>> Now when you talk to
these financial advisors,
what do they say
to you afterwards?
>> Many of them have, in secret,
been feeling more closely
aligned with a pastoral
counselor than with a broker
in their lives because they do
have relationships with people.
And they are very disappointed,
they're plagued in a way
by the complexities
that come in,
the complexities
of people's lives
and how people
struggle around money.
And they want to know
how to solve that.
>> So in a way, you're
feeling of being torn--
>> Yes.
>> --is how you combined your
practice with your financial
advice?
>> Yes.
>> It's that you are a pastor
and financial advisor all
at one time.
>> I do both because
I'm a Buddhist teacher
and a financial advisor.
>> I think it's wonderful.
We're talking about a very
popular subject, and let's
say it right out loud, money.
We're talking to George Kinder
about his book, "The Seven
Stages of Money Maturity".
Stay with us, you will
recognize yourself here.
We'll be right back.
[THEME MUSIC]
We're talking to
George Kinder here
about a very popular
subject, money, and his book.
It's "The Seven Stages of
Money Maturity, Understanding
the Spirit and Value
of Money in Your Life".
OK, what about the
people, George?
Like a lot of us,
guilty, would say,
"all my problem is you're going
to be solved anyway because I
am going to win the lottery."
>> Yeah.
Well.
It's something that I call
magical thinking in my book,
and it's--
I have seven stages and
the first of those stages
is a stage I call
innocence, and it
has to do with our belief
systems around money.
And this is a common
belief system,
more common than it should be.
And what happens
is that if we buy
into that kind of belief
system, it robs us
of other energies inside of us.
It robs us, for
instance, of our vigor
so that we can pursue
what it is that we really
want to accomplish in life.
So these belief
systems are things
that I teach how to be more
relaxed around so that we are
not so attached to them, so that
we recognize them as just one
possibility of many.
>> So we don't stop
buying lottery tickets?
>> Well, I--
>> Do you buy them?
>> No, I don't.
I did years ago,
but I don't anymore.
[LAUGHS] And the reason is
that saving and investing
is a very powerful tool
for becoming frayed.
Do you know that if you
put $2,000 in an IRA
but you destined it for your
daughter or your granddaughter
when she is born, that at
the time of retirement,
if you had invested that
money in the stock market,
that money would be worth
between $1 and $2 million
for that child?
>> Wow.
>> So compounding at a stock
market rate of return is a very
powerful way to become wealthy.
>> The biggest problem I have
found with most people is--
and the conversations I hear--
is that when they get
any kind of a windfall,
they feel obligated to some
reason to spend it right away.
Why?
>> It comes in different ways.
Most for the most part, it's
because they feel deprived.
They felt deprived in some way.
They've had visions or
fantasies of the perfect life
and they've never had it.
And this happens not
merely with sudden wealth
in terms of winning lottery,
but in terms of divorce.
>> With people on commission.
People who work on
commission, they
get all of a sudden a big check.
>> Yes.
>> They don't know where their
next check is coming from,
but they have this one, $10,000.
What can we buy?
>> Yeah, the other problem
with this, Corinne,
is that they have no vision
of what their future might be.
In other words,
financial planning
is something that looks at our
lives over time in relation
to money.
And it takes our lives
seriously over time.
What do we want to accomplish?
How much can we
give to the world?
How much can we grow?
How deeply profoundly can we
express ourselves over time?
What happens is people are
so caught up in the moment
and they feel so
deprived for not
having had this
money in the past,
that they spend it very quickly.
I see it with people who
come through divorces
and feel devastated from the
divorce and feel very scared.
So their self-esteem is very
low and they can spend down
whatever they've
received in a divorce
in very short period of time.
>> Do you think it's a
symptom of depression?
>> I think that that's
part of it, yeah.
There's a certain despair
about not having money,
about not being wealthy
that people feel,
and they can't stand it.
So when they get the
money, they don't want
to delay their gratification.
They want to have
it all right now.
>> Do you think it's because
they feel that there's more
money right around the corner?
>> There may be some
fantasy in that regard,
but I think they don't really
want to look at what's coming
right around the corner.
Because if they did, they'd see
that the money is all going.
>> And they're going to
put some of it away anyway.
>> Yes.
>> Is it OK to spend some?
>> Oh, sure.
I think it's important to
spend some of those times.
>> There's a whole thing in
the new age community that says
the reason you don't have money
is because you have not opened
yourself to abundance.
You have not let it flow.
What do you think about that?
>> I think that that's
another innocent notion.
I think that that's
true for some people
and that's helpful
for some people.
But for many people, it's
just not appropriate.
Because our
relationship to money
involves really knowing
what money is about,
thinking about our future,
saving, investing, planning.
So there's a lot of very
practical kind of earthy things
that have to be
done around money.
>> Are they spiritual?
>> Well, I think they
think that they are,
I think that this is a
spiritual relationship to money.
But you know, the spirit
is part of our heart,
and it's part of the
energy of our body,
and it's part of our mind.
There are all of these
different forces that
have to be engaged
with in relation
to money and in
relation to the spirit.
And so it's not just a
simple pat phrase like money
it's about abundance or
money is about prosperity
and just open to the flow.
I had a fellow who opened
to the flow like that.
That was his notion.
And he lived a wonderful
life for many years
and then he discovered that
these heart palpitations
that he had were in fact
symptoms of something much more
serious.
And he had three daughters
who needed to be educated
and had not saved
a dime in his life
and he was concerned
about their legacy.
And suddenly, that
whole world kind of
blew up for him as
he realized that he
needed to address
money, I think,
in a much more adult way.
>> So we don't trust
like Gandhi did.
We don't trust like
St. Francis of Assisi.
We don't trust like in the
Bible or lilies of the field.
>> Oh, I think that trust is a
lovely thing and I think that
Francis of Assisi and Gandhi
were very mature around money.
But it takes a quality
of extraordinary depth
to take a vow of
poverty as Francis did.
Most of us have this
image of having the flow
but we don't really
look at what it means.
Francis did look
at what it meant
and what the consequences of
that would mean for his life.
And he died a very
young man as well.
>> Because he was broke?
>> Because he didn't--
I think, probably, he didn't
take care enough of his body.
He lived in very
poor circumstances.
>> What about people who go the
other extreme and they save,
save, save, save, save toward
their retirement and live poor?
>> Yeah, that's very
sad too, isn't it?
Again, I think that
the important thing
in money maturity is knowing
what freedom means for you.
It's not just saving
for retirement.
I don't believe in that.
I think that money
is really about what
is freedom, what is
happiness for us,
and how can we use money
and the forces of the world
to accomplish it.
So I think that's the
question that really needs
to be addressed,
whether you save a lot
or you just are working
with money as a flow.
>> You know one
of the tips that--
all through the
book, you give tips.
Very practical tips that
are not very spiritual.
Like it is not holy to pay
the IRS too much money.
Keep your receipts.
>> Right.
[LAUGHS] Yes.
>> I mean, every receipt
for $20, you say,
is worth $5 to you.
>> That's right.
>> Would you throw it away?
>> Yes, yeah.
>> And we don't do that.
We say, "oh well,
that's not necessary."
The cab driver went on a
business trip in Canberra
and said, "you want a receipt?"
"No, it's all right, it's
only $20, it's only $25."
But you say be careful.
>> Yeah, yeah, I mean, that's--
one of my friends
calls that energy
leakage that you can lose a
lot by not paying attention
to these things.
Money requires attention just
as a garden requires attention.
It requires careful
weeding, it requires
proper watering and one needs
to know the season of it.
So these practical tips like
paying attention to taxes
and paying attention
to your investments
and having an appropriate
relationship to savings
are critical if you're going
to achieve the kind of life
that you want to achieve.
>> And of course, the big thing
that strikes terror in all
of our breasts is you say get
rid of the credit card debt.
>> Yeah, yeah, so--
>> How do we live without it?
>> [LAUGHS] Well, so many
people that I see that come
into my office have
an excess of debt.
And as a consequence, they
don't have a very positive image
of what their future
might be, of how
they might live their
life in a way that
is giving all of their creative
resources to the world.
And so debt is a
curse on many of us.
How do we solve that curse?
By addressing it, by looking
at it directly, dealing
with the emotional
neediness that
has brought us to that place.
And then creating a
practical plan for freedom
so that we can live in
freedom instead of in debt.
>> As a financial planner,
you're dealing with people
generally who have
a lot of money.
But there's somebody
out there who
is living from
paycheck to paycheck,
and his wife is working,
and they have three kids,
and the babysitter
didn't show up today.
And now, she's going to have
to take a cut this week.
If you could kind of sum up
all this type of planning,
give them some guidelines,
what would you tell them to do?
>> I think that the toughest
thing for a family like that is
to save, is to have a
relationship to money where
there's some saving and some
investing and some vision
of a future that is positive.
But if you think about it,
it's only about $6 a day
that is necessary
to be saved to be
able to put it into a Roth IRA.
And as I--
>> What's a Roth IRA?
>> A Roth IRA-- well,
any kind of IRA.
An IRA is a retirement vehicle.
>> Oh yeah, I see.
>> Isn't it?
Retirement vehicle.
>> I see.
OK.
>> So you can put $2,000 a
year into a retirement vehicle
and if you were to invest
that in the stock market over
the years, that money will
accumulate in a very powerful
way.
Again, someone who started
to save in their 20s
and saved for just six years
in their 20s $2,000 a year,
at the time that they're
65, if they'd invested
that in the stock market,
they'd be worth $1.3 million.
>> Wow.
>> Just from compounding.
So it's just $5 or $6 a
day is all that it is.
>> And what about
their credit card debt?
What would you say to them?
>> Well, I think it's more
important to pay off the credit
card debt.
It's most important to pay
that off first because you're
living out of balance with
what you're actually earning.
And there's something
that's going to curse you
throughout your life.
If you're paying
all this interest,
who needs to pay
interest in life?
That doesn't buy you anything.
So if you can, instead of
having immediate gratification,
can work with some
delayed gratification,
you can in fact find a much
brighter future for you,
your family.
>> So there are two things
that really stood out for me
in your book.
The first one was sit
down and figure out
what it really cost
you to live because you
don't know what you have to make
unless you see what you need.
And the second most important
thing is credit card debt.
Get out of it.
>> Yes, yes.
>> What about switching to all
these different credit cards
that give you lesser interest.
And then you switch
to the next one.
I know a lot of people
play those games.
>> A lot of people--
I think it's great.
I mean, it's
wonderful that people
are doing that because
that's lessening the interest
that they have to pay.
But it's important that
you do that not as a scheme
to constantly be in credit
card debt but to pay it down
and to begin to create a
habit of saving and investing
so that you can find the freedom
that you want in the world.
>> Well, you're a very
practical spiritual man.
Thank you very much for
being on Wisdom Television.
>> Well, thank you, Corinne.
>> We've been talking here to
George Kinder about this really
explosive subject--
money.
"The Seven Stages
of Money Maturity,
Understanding the Spirit and
Value of Money in Your Life".
So I always tell
you around here,
we bring you the most important
messengers in publishing today
on this show.
These are authors
who care about you.
Keep coming back.
[THEME MUSIC]